Developer guide
===============

This page is only relevant if you want to build ADV-Explorer from source or
extend it. Regular users should install the packaged executables instead
(see :doc:`installation`).

Requirements
------------

* CMake >= 3.16 and a C++17 compiler (GCC >= 10 or MSVC >= 2019)
* Qt 6.2 or newer development packages (Widgets, Concurrent, PrintSupport,
  Test, and the private headers needed by QXlsx)
* Internet access at configure time: CMake FetchContent downloads
  `QXlsx <https://github.com/QtExcel/QXlsx>`_ (MIT). QCustomPlot (GPLv3) and
  KissFFT (BSD) are vendored in ``third_party/``.

On Debian/Ubuntu:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt install cmake g++ qt6-base-dev qt6-base-dev-tools \
       qt6-base-private-dev libgl1-mesa-dev

Building
--------

.. code-block:: bash

   git clone https://github.com/sschwindt/ADV-Explorer.git
   cd ADV-Explorer
   cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
   cmake --build build -j$(nproc)
   ./build/adv-explorer

On Windows, configure with ``-G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64`` and build
with ``cmake --build build --config Release``.

Tests
-----

The QtTest suite verifies the readers, statistics, despiking, rotation
corrections, and project serialization. Several tests assert numeric parity
with the Python/Matlab predecessor
`tke-calculator <https://tke-calculator.readthedocs.io/>`_ (reference values
computed with numpy/pandas are hardcoded in ``tests/tst_core.cpp``; the sample
measurement lives in ``tests/data/``).

.. code-block:: bash

   ctest --test-dir build --output-on-failure     # all tests
   ./build/tests/tst_core flowStatsParity         # a single test function

Architecture
------------

* ``src/core/`` is a GUI-free static library (``advcore``): file readers
  (``VnaReader``, ``CsvReader``), statistics (``FlowStats``), despiking
  filters (``Despike``), probe alignment (``Rotation``), the measurement
  point model (``MeasurementPoint``, ``ProjectModel``), project
  serialization (``Project``), and xlsx export (``ProfileStatsExport``).
* ``src/gui/`` contains the Qt Widgets front end: ``MainWindow``,
  ``FlumeView`` (interactive top view), ``PointWizard``, ``ImportWizard``,
  ``PlotFrame`` (QCustomPlot time series), ``ProfileFrame`` (vertical
  profiles and alignment), and dialogs.
* ``tools/make_template.py`` regenerates ``templates/ADV-profiles.xlsx``;
  its column order must match
  ``statsexport::profileTemplateColumns()``.

Releases and continuous integration
-----------------------------------

``.github/workflows/build.yml`` builds and tests on every push:

* the Linux job (Ubuntu 22.04, so the result runs on Debian 12+ class
  systems) packages a self-contained AppImage with linuxdeploy,
* the Windows job (MSVC, Qt via aqtinstall) packages a portable zip with
  windeployqt.

Pushing a tag ``v*`` attaches both packages to a GitHub release.

Windows code signing
--------------------

The Windows job contains an optional *Sign executable* step that signs
``adv-explorer.exe`` with ``signtool`` (SHA-256 digest plus RFC 3161
timestamp) before packaging. It runs only when two repository secrets are
configured under *Settings > Secrets and variables > Actions*:

* ``WINDOWS_CERT_PFX_BASE64``: the code signing certificate with private key
  as a base64-encoded PFX/PKCS#12 file, for example generated with
  ``base64 -w0 certificate.pfx``.
* ``WINDOWS_CERT_PASSWORD``: the password of the PFX file.

Without these secrets, the step is skipped and the release stays unsigned,
which makes Windows SmartScreen show its *unrecognized app* warning.

A certificate must be obtained from a certificate authority; identity
validation is part of the process and cannot be automated:

* `SignPath.io <https://about.signpath.io/product/open-source>`_ issues free
  code signing for open source projects (application required; signing then
  runs through their service or a certificate they provide).
* `Azure Trusted Signing <https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/trusted-signing>`_
  is a low-cost subscription that supports individual developers.
* Classic OV/EV code signing certificates are sold by CAs such as Sectigo,
  DigiCert, or GlobalSign.

Note that even with a valid signature, SmartScreen reputation for a new
certificate builds up over time; only certificates with established
reputation (or EV validation) suppress the warning immediately.

Documentation screenshots
-------------------------

The screenshots on these pages are generated by the application itself so
they stay current:

.. code-block:: bash

   QT_QPA_PLATFORM=offscreen ./build/adv-explorer --screenshots docs/img

This documentation is built by `Read the Docs <https://readthedocs.org/>`_
from the ``docs/`` folder (Sphinx, configuration in ``.readthedocs.yaml``).
